{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1043{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 6.2.9200}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs32\lang9 Externalisation of the Mind\fs22\line Ruben Meintema\par
\par
\b Wordcount: 3430\par
Abstract\b0\par
In this article I will discuss the way the human mind is represented in the video game Dear Esther. First I explain the importance of the representation of the human mind in a narrative. Then I explain why video games often have a hard time at this. Then I analyse the strategy that is used to do just that in Dear Esther. In Dear Esther aspects of the human mind are projected at (represented at) the physical environment. I call this strategy the ''Externalisation of the Mind".\par
\par
\b From Sequentiality to Experientiality\b0\par
Since long narratology has focussed on sequentiality. Artistotle said a narrative is the representation of action, in the form of a \b succession of events\b0 . Although he admits that human thought and character are the 'natural causes' of action, he finds them ancillary elements of the narrative. In other words, a narrative without action is impossible, but a narrative without characters would be possible. [Aristotle, Poetics, 46-47.]\par
Since structuralism, the emphasis on sequentiality has persisted. In the discussion within the academic studies of video games, the structuralist view on narrative has made several people come to the conclusion that video games are inherently not compatible with narrative. (ex. Juul's article 'Games telling stories')\par
But, viewing literature as merely a succession of events hardly does justice to the art form. Also, this view is hardly consistent with the motivation why we read at all: to experience another world view, and empathize with the fictional characters created by the author. The narratologist Monika Fludernik reverses Artistotle's statement: a narrative without character is impossible, but without action it would be possible. For Fludernik it is the representation of human experience (experientiality) that defines it, and the succession of events could be ancillary elements to it. [Fludernik, Towards a 'natural' narratology (Londen 1990) 27, 24]\par
Not that events do not matter. Or that one could not read literature purely for its plot (sequentiality). I would rather argue that it is cumulative. In Dutch literary education, students are expected through six reading levels. At the first level, the student reads purely for entertainment and takes the events in the story at face value. At this level, the sequentiality is the main motivation. But at the fourth level, the student is expected to delve into characters that are not necessarily close to their own environment. At this level, experientiality is the main driver. But these levels are cumulative, not mutually exclusive. It means that a person is able to enjoy the sequentiality of the narrative, and at the same time enjoy the representation of the mind of the characters. [Ruben Meintema, Beter dan een boek lezen, Homo Ludens Magazine 1 (november 2012)].\par
\par
\b Games and the Representation of the Mind\b0\par
Video games often have a hard time representing the human mind. Partly this is due to medium-specific characteristics, partly to conventions. I will discuss the medium-specific characteristics here.\par
The relationship between a player and a video game character is necessarily different from that between a reader and a literary character: in a game you have to be able to control your character. So if you move your character forward, and encounter events in the story, whose motivation is it to move forward, yours or the character's? Although a smart game designer can sculpt the game environment so that you behave the same way the designer expected the character to behave (from the character's motivation), ultimately it is you as a player that moves the character in the here and now. The character is an empty vessel, with no thoughts and motivations of his own.\par
The game scholar James Newman calls this a 'vehicular relationship'. He then radicalizes this position, and states that the video game character constitutes of nothing more than a set of capabilities, potentials and techniques (while controlled, not in cut-scenes). While in this mode empathy with the character does not even matter for the player, according to Newman. [James Newman, The Myth of the Ergodic Videogame. Some thoughts on player-character relationships in videogames. Game Studies 2:1 (july 2002)] This view seems a bit extreme, and not consistent with the accounts of some players ({{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.destructoid.com/-i-passage-i-the-greatest-five-minute-long-game-ever-made-58961.phtml }}{\fldrslt{http://www.destructoid.com/-i-passage-i-the-greatest-five-minute-long-game-ever-made-58961.phtml\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22 ).\par
Is there a difference between empathy into a video game character in a 1st person perspective game and one in a 3rd person perspective game? According to game scholar Laurie Taylor, there is. In a 1st person game, the vehicular relationship is stronger. "Anything that happens is my doing". But in a 3rd person game, you are embodied \i in the game world \i0 as the character and the character's motivations become part of you. In a 1st person game, the position of the player in the game is schizophrenic, which can distort the empathy with the character. What do you see in a 1st person game when you look in the mirror? The character or the player? This question illustrates the schizophrenic position of the player. [Laurie Taylor, When Seams Fall Apart. Video Game Space and the Player, Game Studies 3:2 (december 2003)]\par
How could the human mind then be represented when the character is an empty vessel? One of the answers is: by externalising the mind to an aspect of the game that the designer/author does have full control over: the physical environment. Game scholar Henry Jenkins already analysed a number of strategies in which the game environment is the main storytelling tool. [Jenkins, Game design as narrative architecture] But, also in Jenkins' analysis, narrative is understood as sequentiality, and not as experientiality. In the strategy of the Externalisation of the Mind, the environment is a storytelling tool in that it represents the inner life of a character.\par
The character then traverses an enviroment that has both aspects of the physical world \i and \i0 of his mind. This is not a strategy exclusive to video games. Movies that deploy this device: Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004), Hard-boiled Wonderland en het einde van de wereld (1985), Inception(2010).\par
In an earlier article I have discussed in detail four cases of video games where externalisation of the mind occurs: Tim Schafer's Psychonauts, Kan Gao's To the Moon, Final Fantasy VII and Silent Hill: Shattered Memories. The function and implementation of externalisation of the mind differs between these games, but they have in common that at some points the character moves through an environment that represents aspects of his or her mind (memories, traumas, illusions, nightmares, etc.)\par
The tool with which I analysed these cases will I use again for Dear Esther: Conceptual Blending. Described by Gilles Fauconnier, Conceptual Blending consists of the mapping of two 'spaces' (conceptual networks) into one single metaphor. The Blend then has characteristics of both conceptual networks, and new meaning is created. [Ruben Meintema, Het Grijze Labyrint. Conceptual blending in de ruimte van het computerspel. Homo Ludens Magazine 2 (december 2013)]\par
\par
\b Dear Esther\b0\par
Dear Esther is an independently produced game by The Chinese Room, consisting of Dan Pinchbeck and Jessica Curry, among others. The project was originally funded by a grant from the University of Portsmouth, where Pinchbeck is professor.\par
The game has a very ambiguous narrative, and it is not at all clear what is happening. There have been many interpretations of what is happening in the game, and while I attempt to analyse the game as objectively as possible, I also am forced to rely heavily on my own interpretations. A neutral description of the game would be: the player-character traverses an abandoned island that seems to be located at the northwest of Scotland. A narrator recounts letters that have been addressed to Esther. While exploring the island, the narrator talks about Donnelly, a cartographer who charted the island, Jakobson, a shepherd who lived on the island, and Paul, a character who seems to have been involved in a car accident that killed Esther.\par
Dear Esther is a 1st person game. This means that the problems that arise from the vehicular relationship could be present in the game. This is indeed true, partly because of the ambiguity of the game. The player-character is never visible in the game, directly nor in a reflection, so his or her identity stays a mystery. It is not even known if it is a man or woman. But because the reflection is never seen, the schizophrenic image of the player becomes never acute.\par
The game has a narrator, something that is not at all common in video games. In the few games that have a narrator, the identity of the narrator is clear. In the 3rd person perspective game Bastion, we hear an omniscient narrator commenting on the events in the 3rd person that unfold while you play. In Metroid: Other M, which is also a 3rd person perspective game, it is the character Samus itself that comments on the events in the 1st person. But in Dear Esther, a 1st person game, the narrator talks in the 1st person. Although it is never made clear whose voice it is, not even what the connection between the \par
Although it is never explicitly stated, the fact that the words of the narrator comment on specific facets of the landscape, leads me to believe that the narrator's voice is that of the player-character.\par
The schizophrenic position of the player in Dear Esther surfaces not in the mirror image, the example that Taylor uses, but in the voice of the narrator. Who's thoughts are uttered, mine or the character's? \par
\par
\b The island\b0\par
The words of the narrator in Dear Esther often correspond to facets of the landscape. They give meaning to the landscape. So they also play a key role in how the metaphor of the externalised mind is constructed. Without the narrator, the island could be descibed as follows. The island has rocky cliffs and sparse vegetation. The weather is cloudy. The island is deserted, but there are signs of prior inhabitants: ruines of houses, roads, fences, shipwrecks. The island also has an elaborate system of underground caves.\par
The words of the narrator give clues that guide my (and other's {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://digitalraconteurs.wordpress.com/2012/03/13/dear-esther-critical-analysis/ }}{\fldrslt{https://digitalraconteurs.wordpress.com/2012/03/13/dear-esther-critical-analysis/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22 ) interpretation in the direction of understanding the island as his inner self. At first he presents the island as something that has grown inside his own body:\par

\pard\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\i "I had kidney stones and you visited me in the hospital. [...] Now my stones have grown into an island [...]"\i0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Later on, he continues this metaphor of the island as his body, and places himself inside it:\par

\pard\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\i "I am travelling through my own body, following the line of infection from the shattered femur towards the heart. [...] In my delirium, I see the twin lights of the moon and the aerial, shining to me through the rocks."\i0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Towards the end, the narrator connects the island to a neural aspect of his body, his brain. The player has advanced to the north side of the island, which this Donnelly figure had never reached: \par

\pard\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\i "If only Donnelly had experienced this, he would have realised he was his own shoreline, as am I. Just as I am becoming this island, so he became his syphilis, retreating into the burning synapses, the stones, the infection."\i0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 If the island stands for the protagonist's body and mind, how could we understand the various locations that we travel? At one point we encounter a set of parallel white lines carved into the cliff. As we encounter them, the narrator comments:\par

\pard\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\i "When someone had died [...] they cut parallel lines into the cliff, exposing the white chalk beneath. With the right eyes you could see them from the mainland or the fishing boats and know to send aid or impose a cordon of protection, and wait a generation until whatever pestilence stalked the cliff path died along with its hosts."\i0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 But immediately the narrator connects the white lines to himself;\par

\pard\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\i "My lines are just for this: to keep any would-be rescuers at bay. The infection is not simply of the flesh."\i0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 If the white lines are connected to the car accident that killed Esther, and this accident seems to be main thread in the story, then they remind of car tracks of a breaking car, or perhaps of white road marking.\par
At another location the connection to the car accident is less vague and more explicit. At several point on the island you encounter groups of burning candles, reminding of a place of memorial. In one of those groups of candles, there is are pictures of a crashed car. In another there are car tires and other car parts. There is also a group of candles that enlighten surgical equipment, pills, and a defibrillator. This equipment could represent the medical aid that Esther received after the car crash, which however did not help. \par
These locations reminding of places of memorial, could represent the traumatic memories of the protagonist related to the car crash. But, the narrator tells us that he does not remember placing the candles, and he starts to wonder that he is not alone on the island.\par
On the island, there is also an elaborate system of caves that you can explore. The walls of these caves are covered with writings and drawings of electrical circuits and chemical compounds. Perhaps these represent the burning synapses and chemical processes of his brain? At one point in the caves, you encounter a deep well filled with water. If you jump in, you find yourself suddenly underwater on a part of the British M5 motorway, complete with lampposts and a road sign that indicates the place of the junction where the car crash occured that killed Esther. Also, there are two crashed cars with lights still on, and scattered car parts. This submerged tableau could represent a memory that is hidden deep down in the brain of the protagonist. A traumatic memory that he would like to forget. Or perhaps, the way he imaged the scene at which his beloved Esther died.\par
The island is filled with wrecks and ruines. You will find ruins of houses, railings, and shipwrecks. These could all allude to the car crash, but also brings to mind abandonment and transitoriness. In that way they help to set the atmosphere of the island.\par
The last significant location on the island is the aerial. The aerial shines a pulsating red light, and it is already visible from the very beginning, when you set foot on the island. It is the landmark where you travel towards during the entire game. It is also where the game ends. Finally you reach the aerial, and you climb it, and jump off. Then the game ends, and you fly one last time over the island, and see the letters folded into paper boats. The blinking red light on the aerial reminds of the heart of the protagonist. However, the fact that the path of the entire game leads to the aerial of which you eventually jump off, suggests that the path is a path of redemption, and that jumping off the aerial leads to death and frees the protagonist of guilt. But that would be speculation.\par
From time to time the narrator contradicts himself. He mixes up events. He first tells of Paul climbing up the aerial and breaking his leg, then he tells about this event as if it happened to himself while climbing up the aerial. So the narrator should be considered an unreliable narrator. The meaning in the game is created through a combination of the narrator's words and the landscape of the island. The same way as Dear Esther has an unreliable narrator, it also has an unreliable space. The island is said to be located in the hebrides near Scotland. How is it possible then that part of the M5 motorway near Exeter is located underwater on the island? The space being unreliable is part of the surprise that you feel when playing the game, and it guides the interpretation in the direction that the island can not be real, somehow.  This also reinforced by the words of the narrator:\par

\pard\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\i "But I have been here and I know, as Donnelly did, that this place is always half-imagined."\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\i0 So in the end the island is a metaphor. It is a metaphor of the inner life of the protagonist. Like any metaphor it is constructed through conceptual blending, from which new meaning arises. The metaphor consists of two input spaces. The first input space is the abandoned island near the coast of Scotland. This input space has the following characteristics. It has a path that you can travel. It has ruines and shipwrecks. It has sad weather and a sad atmosphere. It has no inhabitants, so you are all alone there. It has some locations that are sub-metaphors of their own: the aerial, the cave system.\par
The second input space consists of personal items and memories having to do with a car accident: photographs, surgical equipment, letter sent to Esther, and also a tableau of the car crash itself. These two input space are literally mixed together in the game space of Dear Esther, producing a conceptual blending that has characteristics of both input spaces, producing an unreliable space that can not be real, producing a new metaphor. \par
\par
\b Conclusion\b0\par
Thusfar my analysis of Dear Esther. I have discussed the clues that led me to believe that the island is a metaphor for the inner life of the protagonist that you can traverse. The metaphor works as an externalized mind, a strategy that game could deploy in order to represent the inner life of a protagonist, that would otherwise be a mere empty vessel.\par
Dear Esther is a very ambiguous game, and there is much discussion about what is actually happening. Although there is some consensus about the island being a metaphor for the inner life of the protagonist, there are still many questions and theories about the particularities of the events. Are the narrator and the player the same person? Could it be possible that the player is Esther, following her dead lover's footstep as she reads his letters? Is the island a delusion of a near-death experience? A painkiller-induced haze of half-remembered traumatic events? A limbo, a purgatory, in which a guilty party is doomed to repeat the event infinitely? Is the player Esther, who is lying in a coma after the car crash, and is the voice that you are hearing the voice of her husband sitting alongside her bed? Is the ending, when the player jumps off the aerial, an allusion to death of the protagonist or to the beginning of a new life, waking up from a coma? {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://dearesther.wikia.com/wiki/Speculation_%26_Rumors }}{\fldrslt{http://dearesther.wikia.com/wiki/Speculation_%26_Rumors\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\par
These are all intriguing questions, and I can imagine that it brings much pleasure trying to overthink and try to unravel the events of the narrative. But in the end I (and others {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://forums.steampowered.com/forums/showpost.php?p=29418646&postcount=7 }}{\fldrslt{http://forums.steampowered.com/forums/showpost.php?p=29418646&postcount=7\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22 ) come to the conclusion that it does not really matter what has actually happened during the car crash on the M5, and it does not really matter what the island actually is (coma, delusion, etc). You have to try to not to become too fixated on the sequentiality of the narrative. If you accept that the game is intentially ambiguous and that it is impossible to fully piece the events together, you can see that it is the experientiality that makes the game worth playing. Through the metaphor of the island you can experience the representation of a troubled mind, trying to deal with these events.\par
\par
\b References\par
\b0 Aristotle, Poetics.\par
\lang1033 Fludernik, Monika, Towards a \lquote natural\rquote  narratology (London 1996).\par
Jenkins, Henry, \lquote Game design as narrative architecture\rquote , in: Noah Waldrip-Fruin and Pat Harrigan eds, First Person. New media as story, performance, and game (Cambridge, MA and London 2004) 118-130.\par
Juul, Jesper, 'Games telling stories?' \i Game Studies \i0 1:1 (July 2001). {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.gamestudies.org/0101/juul-gts/ }}{\fldrslt{http://www.gamestudies.org/0101/juul-gts/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\par
\lang9 Meintema, Ruben, 'Beter dan een boek lezen', \i Homo Ludens Magazine \i0 1 (November 2012). {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.homoludensmagazine.nl/artikel.php?titel=beter-dan-een-boek-lezen }}{\fldrslt{http://www.homoludensmagazine.nl/artikel.php?titel=beter-dan-een-boek-lezen\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\lang1033\par
Meintema, Ruben, 'Het Grijze Labyrint. Conceptual blending in de ruimte van het computerspel', \i Homo Ludens Magazine \i0 2 (December 2013). {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://homoludensmagazine.nl/artikel.php?titel=het-grijze-labyrint }}{\fldrslt{http://homoludensmagazine.nl/artikel.php?titel=het-grijze-labyrint\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\par
Newman, James, \lquote The myth of the ergodic video game. Some thoughts on player-character relationships in videogames\rquote , GameStudies (2002).\par
Taylor, Laurie, \lquote When seams fall apart. Video game space and the player\rquote , GameStudies 3 (December 2003). {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.gamestudies.org/0302/taylor/ }}{\fldrslt{http://www.gamestudies.org/0302/taylor/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\lang9\par
\par
URLS:\par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://forums.steampowered.com/forums/showpost.php?p=29418646&postcount=7 }}{\fldrslt{http://forums.steampowered.com/forums/showpost.php?p=29418646&postcount=7\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\lang1043\par
{\lang9{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://dearesther.wikia.com/wiki/Speculation_%26_Rumors }}{\fldrslt{http://dearesther.wikia.com/wiki/Speculation_%26_Rumors\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\lang9\par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://digitalraconteurs.wordpress.com/2012/03/13/dear-esther-critical-analysis/ }}{\fldrslt{https://digitalraconteurs.wordpress.com/2012/03/13/dear-esther-critical-analysis/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://www.destructoid.com/-i-passage-i-the-greatest-five-minute-long-game-ever-made-58961.phtml }}{\fldrslt{http://www.destructoid.com/-i-passage-i-the-greatest-five-minute-long-game-ever-made-58961.phtml\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22\lang1043\par
\par
\lang9\par
}
 